# movietrip

Took data from https://grouplens.org/datasets/movielens/ and chose the Older Datasets: MovieLens 100K Dataset. 

I first tried to do cluster analysis in STATA 14, but when I would try to do the Centroid Linkage or the Ward's Linkage approach
to hierarchical clustering, STATA told me that there was insufficient memory for the matrix. So, I switched to R. Being less comfortable
with R, I relied on a Quick-R file to help with the code. 
To cluster data, I used a variety of techniques: kmeans, Ward Hierarchical, and Model-based clustering. 

kmeans clustering is an algorithm that aims to minimize the within-cluster sum of squares. The most common algorithm employed (Lloyd's
Algorithm, or just kmeans algorithm) uses two steps: the assignment step where an observation is assigned to a cluster minimizing the
euclidean distance and the update step where the new means are calculated to be the centroids of the new clusters. This process is repeated
until the assignment is stable (they no longer change). 

Ward's approach is an agglomerative type of clustering. This means that each observation starts in a cluster of its own and pairs of 
clusters are merged as the algorithm moves through the observations. The mathematics also uses a within cluster minimization 
where the goal is to mimimize within cluster variance. One algorithm that is commonly used for this type of clustering is called
Lance-Williams. There are many (an infinite number) of algorithms in this family and they update cluster distances at each step. This is 
a recursive formula that updates the cluster distance after each merger. 

Model-based clustering uses the same minimization approach as the previous two clustering methods, but introduces an element to determine
the distribution of the data. So, a model-based approach assumes that the data were generated by a model and tries to uncover that original
model from the data. 

These results are plotted and can be found in the general file of the project (titled Third Project) under the plots folder. 

R also had difficulty with the matrix for the Ward hierarchical approach, so I only used a subsection of the data (1000 records). 
